# Open Questions Document

This document is intended to track the still-open "big picture" questions that we will need to tackle as we move forward with this software.

## Data Representation
- How to handle cascades in wide-format data?
    - Template rules (e.g. "x_{time}") for column names
    - Force tall format (unpleasant)
    - Other options?
- Connection between data and nodes:
    - Model 1: Data and Paths
        - Nodes default to being "variable" (vs. "constant" or "database")
            - Specification of "latent" or "manifest" (or "ordinal", "binary", etc.) are constraints, meaning "you MUST NOT connect data to this" vs. "you MUST connect data here" (or "the connected data MUST be ordinal")
        - Data connection (via path) makes it manifest
        - Characteristics of the data connection handle ordinality
            - Possibly a separated type with threshold rules that can be named
                - Makes it easier to reconnect later
        - Pros:
            - Data is just another part of the model
            - Easier composability (sub a factor for any variable)
            - Consistent "lifting" rules (e.g. data paths duplicate across cascades like any other path)
        - Cons:
            - Paths mean something different depending on source
            - Path labels mean something different depending on source
            - Need some automagic to build the data layer for common case
            - No good unicode for a database node
    - Model 2: Data links are characteristics of the node
        - Nodes must be marked manifest or latent
        - Data information (including link to data set and column) are included in the node
        - Ordinality/linking functions are also characteristics of the node
        - Pros:
            - Keeps data spec semantically separated from model
            - Consistent meaning of path and label
            - More akin to a traditional SEM builder
        - Cons:
            - Models must be changed to compose with other models
            - Cascade dynamics must be specified each time
            - Still need to automagic the mapping to make things easy (or just count on the fitting software to do it?)
    - Model 3: Connections are paths, link functions are node properties
    - Model 4: Connections are paths, link functions are operator nodes
    - Model 5: Data model is a totally separate thing
        - Pros:
            - Handles more complex joins easily
        - Cons:
            - Need a simpler version for beginners
- Composition / model cascade:
    - How to specify new unit of measurement after cascading over elements
        - e.g.: ml growth curve cascades measurement model over time. Where does the person ID go?
            - Composition specification should clarify
            - Level may often come from lower model (because data)

## Visual Features
- How to represent model cascades?
    - Model boxes with badges (includes interactivity)?
    - Individual badges on paths and nodes (includes interactivity. More precise but messier)?
    - Stacks (more visually intuitive)?
- How to represent data links
    - If they're paths:
        - Claw shape instead of arrow?
        - Dot instead of arrow?
        - Inset database icon as path end?
            - No good icon, though
            - And may not be clear in print
        - Do labels need to be different?
        - Database node drawn as / expands to vector-of-column-names?
            - Clearer than path labels
            - Keeps path label meanings consistent
            - Easy to pull out the one you want
            - Ungainly for big data files
        - Pull columns from data popup to make connected manifests?
            - Plus "create all" button on the popup?
    - If they're node properties:
        - Database icon in corner to suggest connection?
        - Require exact match of column and manifest?
            - May be awkward for autogenerated column names
            - Construct may not match file
        - Separate data view with a table?

- Ordinal nodes:
    - Draw as tombstone/bread shapes?
        - Resembles auto-handling of manifest/latent
        - Where do we put the threshold parameters?
            - Maybe in the node popup?
            - Maybe in the data path popup?
    - Draw as operator nodes?
        - Format unclear. Options:
            - Latent variable -> link function node -> manifest []-[column]- database
            - Manifest variable <- link function node [] -[column]- database
        - Pros
            - Scales to muliple link functions
            - Potentially allows complex relationships
        - Cons:
            - May not be clear to users
            - Requires new path-modeling standards
            - UI: Does this need a new button?
            - Exacerbates the problem of data paths being different (e.g. you can't apply this operator between manifests)
        - Suggests similar "lag" operator on data nodes?
